It is easy to admit that we are imperfect.
But why is it that it is so painful
when we receive correction?
We all know the right attitude
we should have,
as outlined here at Psalm 141:5.
Shall we read that?
Psalm 141:5—it says:
“Should the righteous one strike me,
“it would be an act of loyal love;
“should he reprove me,
it would be like oil on my head,
which my head would never refuse.”
So maybe we are affected
by a worldly view of discipline.
One dictionary says that discipline is
“punishment to gain control.”
Another dictionary says
that “discipline is to make people obey
and to punish when they don’t.”
It’s so different from Jehovah God’s
point of view, isn’t it?
In our text for today, here in Hebrews,
it says that Jehovah
invites us as his children.
He says in verse 5 “my son”
and then in verse 6:
“For those whom Jehovah loves
he disciplines.”
So it puts discipline
in a very appealing light, doesn’t it?
So the bottom line is
discipline is a form of training.
It’s actually a very exciting process
because it helps us
to get to know Jehovah even better.
So, what we would like to do now is discuss
three common reactions to discipline.
I guess all of us have been guilty of them
at one time or another.
The first one is to feel very crushed
—embarrassed—
and we have this pain in our heart.
And this is very natural.
We see this even in little children
—that they can feel very crushed
when they experience
the displeasure of their parents.
And they react with a long face,
and maybe they even start pouting.
But we as Christians, mature grown-ups,
we don’t react that way, do we?
Now the question is, How do we react?
What should be the proper reaction?
First of all, do not be so overwhelmed
by the emotion.
Do not feel sorry for yourself.
Another important point is
that it is painful
because the discipline exposes
something very sensitive inside us.
It is much better to respond positively
toward the discipline
because the counsel is given for our benefit.
Let us read the words here at Proverbs 15:32
—Proverbs 15:32.
It says: “Anyone refusing discipline
despises his life.”
Yes, it is a miserable life
while fighting our correction, or discipline.
And then it goes on to say:
“But whoever listens to reproof
“acquires understanding.
“The fear of Jehovah is a training in wisdom,
and before glory there is humility.”
So let us learn the lessons
and be trained by Jehovah.
Get the sense
before strong counsel comes
and before some of the bad consequences
come upon us.
The second negative reaction we may have
is that of dismissing the counsel:
‘Well, the counsel is wrong for me.
‘It’s inappropriate.
‘I’m not that bad,
and the person who counseled me
‘does not see the full picture.
And by the way, they can improve
in their way of giving counsel.’
Now, usually when we have this reaction,
it is because the counsel exposed
that we love what is wrong,
and we cover that
by accusing the bearer of the message
as unqualified.
The reality is we  don’t see the big picture.
Well, maybe we don’t want to see
the big picture.
And could it be that we rely
on our own understanding
instead of Jehovah’s view?
How about having this attitude
here at Proverbs 25:12
as an attitude toward the counselor
when he gives us counsel and advice?
Proverbs 25:12
—it says: “Like an earring of gold
“and an ornament of fine gold
is a wise reprover to the receptive ear.”
So we can dignify the process
by adorning the bearer of the message
—the counselor—
with gold, as it were.
So we need to respond with love.
Truly see God’s love,
and love the correction
and the discipline we have.
Now, the third reaction,
we may be irritated
or angered by the counsel,
‘Who do they think they are?’
Maybe it’s a peer.
Maybe it is someone, in our opinion,
who is in a lower status than we are.
‘They have not been in the truth as long.’
‘They do not know as much.’
‘They are younger,’
or whatever reason we may have.
We may look down on them
because they are not good teachers.
The question is, Are we willing to admit
that Jehovah knows better
—that it is really Jehovah talking to us?
And there may be a very important reason
why Jehovah selected that person
or that agency
to come to us and give us the advice.
Now, the scripture for our day text
here at Hebrews 12:5
says that we must not despise
Jehovah’s counsel.
It says we must not “give up
when [we] are corrected by him.”
Now, we may say,
“Well, if Jehovah comes to me
“and he gives me this counsel directly,
of course I will listen.”
But isn’t this Jehovah’s way
of speaking to us directly?
Think of the case of David.
When Nathan came to him,
David didn’t rebel.
He was not angry with Nathan.
He accepted the counsel,
and he said: “I have sinned against Jehovah.”
So, what is the point?
Do not dismiss counsel;
accept the counsel wholeheartedly.
So in summary, see the big picture.
When we are part of Jehovah’s family,
as we hopefully are,
all of us will receive much counsel,
much advice.
All the advice, all the counsel,
that comes from Jehovah
is for our good.
Jehovah is shaping us individually
to become the kind of person
he wants us to become.
So this is not really a discussion
about the need of discipline,
but it is a discussion
of our attitude toward discipline.
Paul’s words in Hebrews 12
are taken from Proverbs.
And in Proverbs chapter 3,
it discusses discipline.
But there toward the end of the discussion
at Proverbs 3:18,
it gives this beautiful invitation
to all of us.
Proverbs 3:18
—it says about discipline:
“It is a tree of life
“to those who take hold of it,
“and those who keep firm hold of it
will be called happy.”
So joyfully accept the counsel;
view it as an embrace from Jehovah God.